hedera-node/docs/design/app/blocks/BlockState.md, before:

# BlockState.md

## Table of Contents

1. [Abstract](#abstract)
2. [Definitions](#definitions)
3. [Component Responsibilities](#component-responsibilities)
4. [Component Interaction](#component-interaction)
5. [Sequence Diagram](#sequence-diagram)
6. [Error Handling](#error-handling)

## Abstract

`BlockState` encapsulates the state of a single block created by the Consensus Node that is eventually sent to a Block
Node. This wrapper around the block data is used to associate items and requests to the block, along with tracking state
changes such as if the block proof has been sent.

A block itself is made up of many items including, but not limited to: one block header, transactions, and one block
proof. These items will get batched into one or more requests that get sent to a Block Node.

## Definitions

<dl>
<dt>BlockItem</dt> <dd>An individual unit of work or data associated with a block, to be streamed to downstream systems.</dd>
<dt>PublishStreamRequest</dt> <dd>A request message constructed from one or more BlockItems, used to stream block data.</dd>
</dl>

## Component Responsibilities

- Maintain the block number this instance represents.
- Store all BlockItems associated with the block.
- Create PublishStreamRequests in batches from the items.
- Track whether all necessary requests for the block have been created.
- Record the timestamp when the block is considered closed/completed.
- Expose read-only access to block contents and state.

## Component Interaction

- Passed into streaming pipelines that require access to individual block data.
- Supplies request metadata to connections for stream transmission.
- Used to create streamable requests.

## Sequence Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant StateMgr as BlockBufferService
    participant BlockState as BlockState

    StateMgr->>BlockState: Add BlockItem
    StateMgr->>BlockState: Create request batch
    BlockState-->>StateMgr: Return PublishStreamRequest
    StateMgr->>BlockState: Mark as completed
```

## Error Handling

- If invalid input is passed (e.g., empty items during forced request creation), the method exits early.
- Ensures the batch size is a minimum of 1.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant BlockState as BlockState
    participant StateMgr as BlockBufferService

    BlockState->>BlockState: Detect invalid block
    BlockState-->>StateMgr: Report block validation error
```

Commit message:

chore: Refactor how requests are sent to the block nodes (#21603)
Signed-off-by: Tim Farber-Newman <tim.farber-newman@swirldslabs.com>

hedera-node/docs/design/app/blocks/BlockState.md, after:

# BlockState.md

## Table of Contents

1. [Abstract](#abstract)
2. [Definitions](#definitions)
3. [Component Responsibilities](#component-responsibilities)
4. [Component Interaction](#component-interaction)
5. [Sequence Diagram](#sequence-diagram)
6. [Error Handling](#error-handling)

## Abstract

`BlockState` encapsulates the state of a single block created by the Consensus Node that is eventually sent to a Block
Node. This wrapper around the block data is used to associate items and requests to the block.

A block itself is made up of many items including, but not limited to: one block header, transactions, and one block
proof. These items will get batched into one or more requests that get sent to a Block Node.

## Definitions

<dl>
<dt>BlockItem</dt> <dd>An individual unit of work or data associated with a block, to be streamed to downstream systems.</dd>
</dl>

## Component Responsibilities

- Maintain the block number this instance represents.
- Store all BlockItems associated with the block.
- Record the timestamp when the block is considered closed/completed.
- Expose read-only access to block contents and state.

## Component Interaction

- Passed into streaming pipelines that require access to individual block data.
- Supplies request metadata to connections for stream transmission.
- Used to create streamable requests.

## Sequence Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Buffer as BlockBufferService
    participant BlockState as BlockState
    participant BlockNodeConnection as Connection

    Buffer->>BlockState: Create new block
    Buffer->>BlockState: Add BlockItem
    Connection->>BlockState: Get Block Items
    Buffer->>BlockState: Mark as closed
```

## Error Handling

- Item's cannot be added to a closed block.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant BlockState as BlockState
    participant StateMgr as BlockBufferService

    BlockState->>BlockState: Detect invalid block
    BlockState-->>StateMgr: Report block validation error
```
